================================================================================
PARTIAL CAPTURE — NOT THE COMPLETE AUTHORITATIVE TEXT.
This is a partial text extraction of the ITLOS Seabed Disputes Chamber Advisory
Opinion of 1 February 2011 (Case No. 17). Automated capture via the approved
web-fetch tool truncated at approximately paragraph 204 because the document
exceeds the tool's output cap. The final paragraphs and the operative reply
("For these reasons, THE CHAMBER ... Unanimously ... Replies ...") are NOT
included here. The record's metadata therefore carries authoritative_status:
authoritative_missing. The COMPLETE official English PDF must be added by a human
download (a provenance upgrade), from:
  https://www.itlos.org/fileadmin/itlos/documents/cases/case_no_17/17_adv_op_010211_en.pdf
Official citation: Responsibilities and obligations of States with respect to
activities in the Area, Advisory Opinion, 1 February 2011, ITLOS Reports 2011, p. 10.
Captured: 2026-07-03.
================================================================================


INTERNATIONAL TRIBUNAL FOR THE LAW OF THE SEA
REPORTS OF JUDGMENTS,
ADVISORY OPINIONS AND ORDERS
Responsibilities and obligations of States 
sponsoring persons and entities with respect 
to activities in the Area
(REQUEST FOR ADVISORY OPINION
SUBMITTED TO THE SEABED DISPUTES CHAMBER)
List of cases: No. 17
ADVISORY OPINION OF 1 FEBRUARY 2011
2011
TRIBUNAL INTERNATIONAL DU DROIT DE LA MER
RECUEIL DES ARRÊTS,
AVIS CONSULTATIFS ET ORDONNANCES
Responsabilités et obligations des Etats qui 
patronnent des Personnes et des entités dans 
le cadre d’activités menées dans la Zone
(DEMANDE D’AVIS CONSULTATIF SOUMISE À LA CHAMBRE
POUR LE RÈGLEMENT DES DIFFÉRENDS RELATIFS AUX 
FONDS MARINS)
Rôle des affaires : No. 17
AVIS CONSULTATIF DU 1ER FÉVRIER 2011
Official citation:
Responsibilities and obligations of States with respect to activities in the Area,
Advisory Opinion, 1 February 2011, ITLOS Reports 2011, p. 10
-----------------
Mode officiel de citation :
Responsabilités et obligations des Etats dans le cadre d’activités menées dans la 
Zone, avis consultatif, 1er février 2011, TIDM Recueil 2011, p. 10
1 FEBRUARY 2011
ADVISORY OPINION
Responsibilities and obligations of States 
sponsoring persons and entities with respect 
to activities in the Area
(REQUEST FOR ADVISORY OPINION
SUBMITTED TO THE SEABED DISPUTES CHAMBER)
Responsabilités et obligations des Etats qui 
patronnent des Personnes et des entités dans 
le cadre d’activités menées dans la Zone
(DEMANDE D’AVIS CONSULTATIF SOUMISE À LA CHAMBRE
POUR LE RÈGLEMENT DES DIFFÉRENDS RELATIFS AUX 
FONDS MARINS)
1ER FÉVRIER 2011
AVIS CONSULTATIF
10
Seabed Disputes Chamber of the International 
Tribunal for the Law of the Sea
YEAR 2011
1 February 2011
List of cases:
No. 17
Responsibilities and obligations of States 
sponsoring persons and entities with respect 
to activities in the Area
ADVISORY OPINION
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 11
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Paragraphs
Introduction 1-71
I. The Request 1-3
II. Events leading to the Request 4
III. Chronology of the procedure 5-24
IV. Role of the Chamber in advisory proceedings 25-30
V. Jurisdiction 31-45
VI. Admissibility 46-49
VII. Applicable law and procedural rules 50-56
VIII. Interpretation 57-71
In general 57-60
Multilingual international instruments 61-63
Meaning of key terms 64-71
Question 1 72-163
I. Sponsorship 74-81
II. “Activities in the Area” 82-97
III. Prospecting 98
IV. Responsibilities and obligations 99-120
Key provisions 99-102
Obligations of the contractor whose compliance the 
sponsoring State must ensure 103-106
“Responsibility to ensure” 107-116
The content of the “due diligence” obligation to ensure 117-120
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 12
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
V. Direct obligations of sponsoring States 121-140
The obligation to assist the Authority 124
Precautionary approach 125-135
Best environmental practices 136-137
Guarantees in the event of an emergency order by the 
Authority for protection of the marine environment 138
Availability of recourse for compensation 139-140
VI. Environmental impact assessment 141-150
VII. Interests and needs of developing States 151-163
Question 2 164-211
I. Applicable provisions 165-169
II. Liability in general 170-174
III. Failure to carry out responsibilities 175-177
IV. Damage 178-184
Causal link between failure and damage 181-184
V. Exemption from liability 185-187
VI. Scope of liability under the Convention 188-205
Standard of liability 189
Multiple sponsorship 190-192
Amount and form of compensation 193-198
Relationship between the liability of the contractor 
and of the sponsoring State 199-205
VII. Liability of sponsoring States for violation of their 
direct obligations 206-207
VIII. “Without prejudice” clause 208-211
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 13
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
Question 3 212-241
I. General aspects 213-217
II. Laws and regulations and administrative measures 218-222
III. Compliance by means of a contract? 223-226
IV. Content of the measures 227-241
Operative part 242
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 14
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
ADVISORY OPINION
Present: President TREVES; Judges MAROTTA RANGEL, NELSON, 
CHANDRASEKHARA RAO, WOLFRUM, YANAI, KATEKA, 
HOFFMANN, GAO, BOUGUETAIA, GOLITSYN; 
Registrar GAUTIER.
On Responsibilities and Obligations of States sponsoring persons and 
entities with respect to activities in the Area,
THE SEABED DISPUTES CHAMBER,
composed as above,
gives the following Advisory Opinion:
Introduction
I. The Request
1. The questions on which the advisory opinion of the Seabed Disputes 
Chamber of the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea (hereinafter 
“the Chamber”) has been requested are set forth in decision ISBA/16/C/13 
adopted by the Council of the International Seabed Authority (hereinafter 
“the Council”) on 6 May 2010 at its sixteenth session. By letter dated 11 May 
2010, transmitted electronically to the Registry of the Tribunal on 14 May 
2010, the Secretary-General of the International Seabed Authority (hereinafter 
“the Secretary-General”) officially communicated to the Chamber the decision 
taken by the Council. The original of that letter was received in the Registry 
on 17 May 2010. Certified true copies of the English and French versions 
of the Council’s decision were forwarded by the Legal Counsel of the 
International Seabed Authority (hereinafter “the Legal Counsel”) on 8 June 
2010 and received in the Registry on the same date. The decision of the 
Council reads:
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 15
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
The Council of the International Seabed Authority,
Considering the fact that developmental activities in the Area have 
already commenced,
Bearing in mind the exchange of views on legal questions arising 
within the scope of activities of the Council,
Decides, in accordance with Article 191 of the United Nations 
Convention on the Law of the Sea (“the Convention”), to request the 
Seabed Disputes Chamber of the International Tribunal for the Law of the 
Sea, pursuant to Article 131 of the Rules of the Tribunal, to render an 
advisory opinion on the following questions:
1. What are the legal responsibilities and obligations of States Parties 
to the Convention with respect to the sponsorship of activities in the Area 
in accordance with the Convention, in particular Part XI, and the 1994 
Agreement relating to the Implementation of Part XI of the United Nations 
Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982?
2. What is the extent of liability of a State Party for any failure to 
comply with the provisions of the Convention, in particular Part XI, and 
the 1994 Agreement, by an entity whom it has sponsored under Article 
153, paragraph 2 (b), of the Convention?
3. What are the necessary and appropriate measures that a sponsoring 
State must take in order to fulfil its responsibility under the Convention, in 
particular Article 139 and Annex III, and the 1994 Agreement?
2. The Request was entered in the List of cases as No. 17 and the case was 
named “Responsibilities and Obligations of States sponsoring persons and 
entities with respect to activities in the Area”.
3. In his letter of 11 May 2010, the Secretary-General informed 
the Chamber of the appointment of the Legal Counsel as the representative 
of the International Seabed Authority (hereinafter “the Authority”) for the 
proceedings.
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 16
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
II. Events leading to the Request
4. The Chamber considers it necessary to describe the events that led to 
the request for an advisory opinion:
– On 10 April 2008, the Authority received two applications for approval 
of a plan of work for exploration in the areas reserved for the conduct 
of activities by the Authority through the Enterprise or in association 
with developing States pursuant to Annex III, article 8, of the United 
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (hereinafter “the 
Convention”). These applications were submitted by Nauru Ocean 
Resources Inc. (sponsored by the Republic of Nauru) and Tonga 
Offshore Mining Ltd. (sponsored by the Kingdom of Tonga);
– These applications were submitted to the Legal and Technical 
Commission of the Authority. On 5 May 2009, the applicants submitted to the Authority a request that consideration of the applications 
should be postponed. At the fifteenth session of the Authority, held 
from 25 May to 5 June 2009, the Legal and Technical Commission 
decided to defer further consideration of the item;
– On 1 March 2010, the Republic of Nauru transmitted to the SecretaryGeneral a proposal, set out in document ISBA/16/C/6, to seek an 
advisory opinion from the Chamber on a number of specific questions 
regarding the responsibility and liability of sponsoring States;
– In support of its proposal, Nauru submitted, inter alia, the following 
considerations:
In 2008 the Republic of Nauru sponsored an application by Nauru 
Ocean Resources Inc. for a plan of work to explore for polymetallic nodules in the Area. Nauru, like many other developing States, 
does not yet possess the technical and financial capacity to undertake seafloor mining in international waters. To participate effectively in activities in the Area, these States must engage entities in 
the global private sector (in much the same way as some developing countries require foreign direct investment). Not only do some 
developing States lack the financial capacity to execute a seafloor 
mining project in international waters, but some also cannot afford 
exposure to the legal risks potentially associated with such a project. Recognizing this, Nauru’s sponsorship of Nauru Ocean 
Resources Inc. was originally premised on the assumption 
that Nauru could effectively mitigate (with a high degree of certainty) the potential liabilities or costs arising from its sponsorship. 
This was important, as these liabilities or costs could, in some 
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 17
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
circumstances, far exceed the financial capacities of Nauru (as 
well as those of many other developing States). Unlike terrestrial 
mining, in which a State generally only risks losing that which it 
already has (for example, its natural environment), if a developing 
State can be held liable for activities in the Area, the State may 
potentially face losing more than it actually has. (ISBA/16/C/6, 
paragraph 1);
Ultimately, if sponsoring States are exposed to potential 
significant liabilities, Nauru, as well as other developing States, 
may be precluded from effectively participating in activities in the 
Area, which is one of the purposes and principles of Part XI of the 
Convention, in particular as provided for in article 148; article 150, 
subparagraph (c); and article 152, paragraph 2. As a result, Nauru 
considers it crucial that guidance be provided on the interpretation 
of the relevant sections of Part XI pertaining to responsibility and 
liability, so that developing States can assess whether it is within 
their capabilities to effectively mitigate such risks and in turn 
make an informed decision on whether or not to participate in 
activities in the Area. (ISBA/16/C/6, paragraph 5);
– Nauru’s proposal was included in the agenda for the sixteenth session 
of the Council of the Authority, during which intensive discussions on 
this agenda item were held at the 155th, 160th and 161st meetings;
– The Council decided not to adopt the proposal as formulated by Nauru. 
In view of the wishes of many participants in the debate, it decided to 
request an advisory opinion on three more abstract but concise 
questions;
– These questions were formulated in decision ISBA/16/C/13, adopted 
by the Council at its 161st meeting on 6 May 2010. As indicated by the 
Authority in its written statement and at the hearing, the decision 
adopted by the Council on 6 May 2010 was taken “without a vote” and 
“without objection” (written statement of the Authority, paragraph 2.4; 
ITLOS/PV.2010/1/Rev.1, p. 10, lines 16-21).
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 18
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
III. Chronology of the procedure
5. Pursuant to article 133, paragraph 1, of the Rules of the Tribunal 
(hereinafter “the Rules”), the Registrar, by Note Verbale dated 17 May 2010, 
notified all States Parties to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the 
Sea (hereinafter “States Parties”) of the request for an advisory opinion.
6. By letter dated 18 May 2010, pursuant to article 4 of the Agreement 
on Cooperation and Relationship between the United Nations and the 
International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea of 18 December 1997, the 
Registrar notified the Secretary-General of the United Nations of the request 
for an advisory opinion.
7. By Order dated 18 May 2010, pursuant to article 133, paragraph 2, of 
the Rules, the President decided that the Authority and the organizations 
invited as intergovernmental organizations to participate as observers in the 
Assembly of the Authority (hereinafter “the Assembly”) were considered 
likely to be able to furnish information on the questions submitted to the 
Chamber for an advisory opinion. Accordingly, the President invited the States 
Parties, the Authority and the aforementioned intergovernmental organizations 
to present written statements on those questions. By the same Order, in accordance with article 133, paragraph 3, of the Rules, the President fixed 9 August 
2010 as the time-limit within which written statements on those questions 
might be submitted to the Chamber. In the Order, in accordance with article 
133, paragraph 4, of the Rules, the President further decided that oral proceedings would be held and fixed 14 September 2010 as the date for the opening of 
the hearing. States Parties, the Authority and the aforementioned intergovernmental organizations were invited to participate in the hearing and to indicate 
to the Registrar, not later than 3 September 2010, their intention to make oral 
statements.
8. Article 191 of the Convention requires the Chamber to give advisory 
opinions “as a matter of urgency”. In the present case, the time-limits for the 
submission of written statements and the date of the opening of the hearing, as 
set out in the Orders of the President, were fixed with a view to meeting this 
requirement.
9. By Order dated 28 July 2010, in light of a request submitted to the 
Chamber, the President extended the time-limit for the submission of written 
statements to 19 August 2010.
10. By letter dated 30 July 2010, pursuant to article 131 of the Rules, the 
Legal Counsel transmitted to the Chamber a dossier containing documents in 
support of the Request. The dossier was posted on the Tribunal’s website.
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 19
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
11. Within the time-limit fixed by the President, written statements were 
submitted by the following 12 States Parties, which are listed in the order in 
which their statements were received: the United Kingdom, Nauru, the 
Republic of Korea, Romania, the Netherlands, the Russian Federation, Mexico, 
Germany, China, Australia, Chile, and the Philippines. Within the same timelimit, written statements were also submitted by the Authority and two organizations, namely, the Interoceanmetal Joint Organization and the International 
Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources.
12. Upon receipt of those statements, in accordance with article 133, paragraph 3, of the Rules, the Registrar transmitted copies thereof to the States 
Parties, the Authority and the organizations that had submitted written statements. On 19 August 2010, pursuant to article 134 of the Rules, the written 
statements submitted to the Chamber were made accessible to the public on the 
Tribunal’s website.
13. On 17 August 2010, the Registry received a statement submitted 
jointly by Stichting Greenpeace Council (Greenpeace International) and the 
World Wide Fund for Nature. The statement was accompanied by a petition 
from these two non-governmental organizations in which they requested permission to participate in the advisory proceedings as amici curiae. At the 
request of the President, by separate letters dated 27 August 2010, the Registrar 
informed those organizations that their statement would not be included in the 
case file since it had not been submitted under article 133 of the Rules; it 
would, however, be transmitted to the States Parties, the Authority and the 
intergovernmental organizations that had submitted written statements, which 
would be informed that the document was not part of the case file and that it 
would be posted on a separate section of the Tribunal’s website. By communication dated 27 August 2010, the States Parties, the Authority and the intergovernmental organizations in question were so informed.
14. On 10 September 2010, the Chamber, having considered a petition 
from Stichting Greenpeace Council (Greenpeace International) and the World 
Wide Fund for Nature requesting permission to participate in the advisory 
proceedings as amici curiae, decided not to grant that request. The decision 
was communicated to the two organizations on the same day by a letter from 
the President.
15. By e-mail dated 26 August 2010, the Legal Counsel transmitted to the 
Registrar, at the latter’s request, a note containing a summary of potential 
environmental impacts of seabed mining. This document was posted on the 
Tribunal’s website.
16. By letter dated 1 September 2010, after the expiry of the time-limit for 
the submission of written statements, the United Nations Environment 
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 20
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
Programme submitted a written statement that was received by the Registry on 
2 September 2010. The President nevertheless decided that the statement 
should be included in the case file. Accordingly, on 3 September 2010, the 
Registrar transmitted an electronic copy of that document to the States Parties, 
the Authority and the intergovernmental organizations that had submitted written statements. The document was also posted on the Tribunal’s website.
17. Within the time-limit fixed in the Order of the President of 18 May 
2010, nine States Parties expressed their intention to participate in the oral 
proceedings, namely, Argentina, Chile, Fiji, Germany, Mexico, Nauru, the 
Netherlands, the Russian Federation and the United Kingdom. Within the same 
time-limit, the Authority and two organizations, namely, the Intergovernmental 
Oceanographic Commission (IOC) of the United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) and the International Union 
for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources also expressed their intention to participate in the oral proceedings.
18. Prior to the opening of the oral proceedings, the Chamber held initial 
deliberations on 10, 13 and 14 September 2010.
19. At four public sittings held on 14, 15 and 16 September 2010, the 
Chamber heard oral statements, in the following order, by:
For the International Seabed Mr Nii Odunton, Secretary-General,
Authority:
Mr Michael Lodge, Legal Counsel,
Mr Kening Zhang, Senior Legal Officer, 
and
Ms Gwenaëlle Le Gurun, Legal Officer;
For the Federal Republic Ms Susanne Wasum-Rainer, Legal
of Germany: Adviser, Director-General for Legal 
Affairs, Federal Foreign Office;
For the Kingdom of the Ms Liesbeth Lijnzaad, Legal Adviser, 
Netherlands: Ministry of Foreign Affairs;
For the Argentine Republic: Ms Susana Ruiz Cerutti, Ambassador, 
Legal Adviser, Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
International Trade and Worship;
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 21
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
For the Republic of Chile: Mr Roberto Plaza, Minister Counsellor, 
Consul General of Chile in Hamburg;
For the Republic of Fiji: Mr Pio Bosco Tikoisuva, High Commissioner of Fiji to the United Kingdom of 
Great Britain and Northern Ireland;
For the United Mexican States: Mr Joel Hernández G., Ambassador, Legal 
Adviser, Ministry of Foreign Affairs;
For the Republic of Nauru: Mr Peter Jacob, First Secretary, Nauru 
High Commission in Suva (Fiji), and Mr 
Robert Haydon, Advisor;
For the United Kingdom of Sir Michael Wood KCMG, Member of the
Great Britain and Northern English Bar and Member of the InterIreland: national Law Commission;
For the Russian Federation: Mr Vasiliy Titushkin, Deputy Director, 
Legal Department, Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs;
For the Intergovernmental Mr Ehrlich Desa, Deputy Executive
Oceanographic Commission Secretary;
(IOC) of the United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and 
Cultural Organization
(UNESCO):
For the International Union for Ms Cymie R. Payne, Member of the Bar
Conservation of Nature and of the State of California, the CommonNatural Resources: wealth of Massachusetts, and the Supreme 
Court of the United States of America, 
Counsel,
Mr Robert A. Makgill, Barrister and 
Solicitor of the High Court of New 
 Zealand, Counsel, and
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 22
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
Mr Donald K. Anton, Barrister and 
Solicitor of the Supreme Court of Victoria, 
the Supreme Court of New South Wales 
and the High Court of Australia; Member 
of the Bar of the State of Missouri, the 
State of Idaho, and the Supreme Court of 
he United States; and Senior Lecturer in 
International Law at the Australian 
National University College of Law, 
Counsel.
20. The hearing was broadcast over the internet as a webcast.
21. By letter dated 13 September 2010, pursuant to article 76, paragraph 
1, of the Rules, the Registrar transmitted to the Authority, prior to the hearing, 
a list of the following points that the Chamber wished the Authority to 
address:
1. With reference to article 153, paragraph 4, of the Convention, how 
has the Authority been exercising control over activities in the Area for 
the purpose of securing compliance with the relevant provisions of the 
Convention and what experience has the Authority accumulated over the 
years in this regard?
2. In what form has assistance been provided so far to the Authority 
by sponsoring States, including the case of various States sponsoring one 
contractor, for the purpose of securing compliance with provisions referred 
to in article 153, paragraph 4, and what experience has the Authority accumulated over the years in this regard?
3. What are the activities in the Area, including activities associated 
with exploration and exploitation, which so far have been controlled by the 
Authority?
4. Would it be possible for the Authority to provide the certificates of 
sponsorship regarding the contracts it has concluded with contractors, as 
well as copies of the sponsorship agreements if available?
22. Responses to points 1 to 3 of this list were provided in the oral statements made on behalf of the Authority during the sitting held on 14 September 
2010. By letter dated 17 September 2010, the Legal Counsel communicated 
information on point 4 of the list. This letter was posted on the Tribunal’s 
website.
23. At the request of the President, by letter dated 13 October 2010, the 
Registrar asked the Legal Counsel to provide the Chamber with information 
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 23
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
on the various phases of the process of exploration and exploitation of 
resources in the Area (collection, transportation to the surface, initial treatment, etc.), as well as information on the technology available. The Legal 
Counsel provided this information by letter dated 15 November 2010. The 
information was posted on the Tribunal’s website.
24. As indicated by the President at the opening of the oral proceedings, 
one Member of the Chamber, Judge Chandrasekhara Rao, was prevented by 
illness from sitting on the bench during the hearing. However, with the 
approval of the Chamber, he participated in the subsequent deliberations on the 
advisory opinion.
IV. Role of the Chamber in advisory proceedings
25. The Chamber is a separate judicial body within the Tribunal entrusted, 
through its advisory and contentious jurisdiction, with the exclusive function 
of interpreting Part XI of the Convention and the relevant annexes and regulations that are the legal basis for the organization and management of activities 
in the Area.
26. The advisory jurisdiction is connected with the activities of the 
Assembly and the Council, the two principal organs of the Authority. The 
Authority is the international organization established by the Convention in 
order to “organize and control activities in the Area” (article 157, paragraph 1, 
of the Convention and section 1, paragraph 1, of the Annex to the 1994 
Agreement relating to the Implementation of Part XI of the United Nations 
Convention on the Law of the Sea (hereinafter “the 1994 Agreement”)). In 
order to exercise its functions properly in accordance with the Convention, the 
Authority may require the assistance of an independent and impartial judicial 
body. This is the underlying reason for the advisory jurisdiction of the 
Chamber. In the exercise of that jurisdiction, the Chamber is part of the system 
in which the Authority’s organs operate, but its task within that system is to act 
as an independent and impartial body.
27. According to article 159, paragraph 10, and article 191 of the 
Convention, the advisory function of the Chamber concerns legal questions 
submitted by the Assembly and by the Council. Advisory opinions requested 
under article 159, paragraph 10, of the Convention serve to assist the Assembly 
during its decision-making process. The Chamber’s advisory jurisdiction 
under article 191 of the Convention concerns “legal questions arising within 
the scope” of the activities of either the Assembly or the Council.
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 24
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
28. As provided in article 187 of the Convention, the Chamber also has 
contentious jurisdiction to settle different categories of disputes referred to in 
that article with respect to activities in the Area.
29. The functions of the Chamber, set out in Part XI of the Convention, 
are relevant for the good governance of the Area. The Secretary-General 
made this point at the hearing: “The Chamber has a high responsibility 
to ensure that the provisions of Part XI of the Convention and the 1994 
Agreement are implemented properly and the regime for deep seabed mining 
as a whole is properly interpreted and applied” (ITLOS/PV.2010/1/Rev.1, 
p. 5, lines 16-19).
30. The Chamber is mindful of the fact that by answering the questions it 
will assist the Council in the performance of its activities and contribute to the 
implementation of the Convention’s regime.
V. Jurisdiction
31. The Chamber will first determine whether it has jurisdiction to give 
the advisory opinion requested by the Council. The conditions to be met in 
order to establish the jurisdiction of the Chamber are set out in article 191 of 
the Convention which reads as follows:
The Seabed Disputes Chamber shall give advisory opinions at the request 
of the Assembly or the Council on legal questions arising within the scope 
of their activities. Such opinions shall be given as a matter of urgency.
32. As regards the present proceedings, the conditions to be met are: 
(a) that there is a request from the Council; (b) that the request concerns legal 
questions; and (c) that these legal questions have arisen within the scope of the 
Council’s activities.
33. As to the first condition, the Chamber observes that article 191 of the 
Convention confers on the Assembly and the Council the power to request 
advisory opinions from the Chamber. In the present case, the decision to 
request an advisory opinion from the Chamber was adopted by the Council.
34. Rule 56, paragraph 1, of the Rules of Procedure of the Council provides that, as a general rule, decision-making in the Council should be by 
consensus. Section 3, paragraph 2, of the Annex to the 1994 Agreement states 
that “[a]s a general rule, decision-making in the organs of the Authority should 
be by consensus”. According to article 161, paragraph 8 (e), of the Convention 
and rule 59 of the Rules of Procedure of the Council, “consensus” means the 
absence of any formal objection.
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 25
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
35. In its written statement, the Authority declared that “[t]he decision of 
the Council to request the Chamber for an advisory opinion was taken without 
objection and can thus be regarded as having been taken by consensus”. The 
information provided by the Authority also shows that the Council’s decision 
was taken in accordance with the internal rules of procedure of the Authority.
36. The Chamber thus concludes that there is a valid request by the 
Council.
37. With respect to the second condition, the Chamber must satisfy itself 
that the advisory opinion requested by the Council concerns “legal questions” 
within the meaning of article 191 of the Convention.
38. In examining this requirement, the Chamber observes that the three 
questions before it relate, inter alia, to “the legal responsibilities and obligations of States Parties to the Convention with respect to the sponsorship of 
activities in the Area”; “the extent of liability of a State Party for any failure to 
comply with the provisions of the Convention . . . by an entity whom it has 
sponsored”; and the “measures that a sponsoring State must take in order to 
fulfil its responsibility under the Convention”.
39. The questions put to the Chamber concern the interpretation of provisions of the Convention and raise issues of general international law. The 
Chamber recalls that the International Court of Justice (hereinafter “the ICJ”) 
has stated that “questions ‘framed in terms of law and rais[ing] problems of 
international law . . . are by their very nature susceptible of a reply based on 
law’” (Accordance with International Law of the Unilateral Declaration of 
Independence in Respect of Kosovo, Advisory Opinion, 22 July 2010, paragraph 25; Western Sahara, Advisory Opinion, I.C.J. Report 1975, p. 12, at 
paragraph 15).
40. For these reasons, the Chamber concludes that the questions raised by 
the Council are of a legal nature.
41. As to the third condition, article 191 of the Convention also requires 
that an advisory opinion must concern legal questions “arising within the scope 
of [the] activities” of the Assembly or the Council. In the present case, it is for 
the Chamber to determine whether the legal questions submitted to it arose 
within the scope of the activities of the Council. Therefore, it is pertinent to 
examine the provisions of the Convention and of the 1994 Agreement that 
define the Council’s competence.
42. The powers and functions of the Council are set out in Part XI, section 4, of the Convention and, in particular, article 162 thereof, read together 
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 26
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
with the 1994 Agreement. Article 162, paragraphs 1 and 2 (a), of the 
Convention reads as follows:
1. The Council is the executive organ of the Authority. The Council shall 
have the power to establish, in conformity with this Convention and 
the general policies established by the Assembly, the specific policies 
to be pursued by the Authority on any question or matter within the 
competence of the Authority.
2. In addition, the Council shall:
(a) supervise and coordinate the implementation of the provisions of 
this Part on all questions and matters within the competence of the 
Authority and invite the attention of the Assembly to cases of noncompliance.
43. Section 3, paragraph 11 (a), read together with section 1, paragraphs 
6 to 11, of the 1994 Agreement, entrusts the Council with the function of 
approving plans of work in accordance with Annex III, article 6, of the 
Convention. Article 162, paragraph 2 (l), of the Convention confers on the 
Council the power to “exercise control over activities in the Area in accordance 
with article 153, paragraph 4, and the rules, regulations and procedures of the 
Authority”.
44. In light of these provisions, the Chamber concludes that the legal questions before it fall within the scope of the activities of the Council, since they 
relate to the exercise of its powers and functions, including its power to 
approve plans of work.
45. For the aforementioned reasons, the Chamber finds that it has jurisdiction to entertain the request for an advisory opinion submitted to it by the 
Council.
VI. Admissibility
46. The Chamber now turns to questions of admissibility.
47. Some of the participants in the proceedings have drawn attention to 
the wording of article 191 of the Convention, which states that the Chamber 
“shall give” advisory opinions, and have compared it to article 65, paragraph 
1, of the Statute of the ICJ, which states that the Court “may give” an advisory 
opinion. In light of this difference, they have argued that, contrary to the discretionary powers of the ICJ, the Chamber, once it has established its jurisdiction, has no discretion to decline a request for an advisory opinion.
48. While noting the difference between the wording of article 191 of the 
Convention and article 65 of the Statute of the ICJ, the Chamber does not 
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 27
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
consider it necessary to pronounce on the consequences of that difference with 
respect to admissibility in the present case.
49. The Chamber deems it appropriate to render the advisory opinion 
requested by the Council and will proceed accordingly.
VII. Applicable law and procedural rules
50. The Chamber will now proceed to indicate the applicable law.
51. Article 293, paragraph 1, of the Convention and article 38 of the 
Statute of the Tribunal (hereinafter “the Statute”) set out the law to be applied 
by the Chamber.
52. Article 293, paragraph 1, of the Convention, reads:
A court or tribunal having jurisdiction under this section [section II of Part 
XV of the Convention] shall apply this Convention and other rules of 
international law not incompatible with this Convention.
53. Article 38 of the Statute reads:
In addition to the provisions of article 293, the Chamber shall apply:
a) the rules, regulations and procedures of the Authority adopted in 
accordance with the Convention; and
b) the terms of contracts concerning activities in the Area in matters 
relating to those contracts.
54. It should be noted that, in accordance with article 2, paragraph 1, of 
the 1994 Agreement, the provisions of that Agreement and Part XI of the 
Convention “shall be interpreted and applied together as a single instrument. 
In the event of any inconsistency between this Agreement and Part XI, the 
provisions of this Agreement shall prevail”.
55. The procedural rules applicable during advisory proceedings before 
the Chamber are set out in article 40, paragraph 2, of the Statute and section H 
(“Advisory proceedings”) of the Rules, in particular article 130, paragraph 1, 
thereof.
56. Article 40, paragraph 2, of the Statute reads:
In the exercise of its functions relating to advisory opinions, the Chamber 
shall be guided by the provisions of this Annex relating to procedure 
before the Tribunal to the extent to which it recognizes them to be 
applicable.
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 28
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
Article 130, paragraph 1, of the Rules reads:
In the exercise of its functions relating to advisory opinions, the Seabed 
Disputes Chamber shall apply this section and be guided, to the extent to 
which it recognizes them to be applicable, by the provisions of the Statute 
and of these Rules applicable in contentious cases.
VIII. Interpretation
In general
57. Among the rules of international law that the Chamber is bound to 
apply, those concerning the interpretation of treaties play a particularly important role. The applicable rules are set out in Part III, Section 3 entitled 
“Interpretation of Treaties” and comprising articles 31 to 33 of the 1969 
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (hereinafter “the Vienna 
Convention”). These rules are to be considered as reflecting customary international law. Although the Tribunal has never stated this view explicitly, it has 
done so implicitly by borrowing the terminology and approach of the Vienna 
Convention’s articles on interpretation (see the Tribunal’s Judgment of 
23 December 2002 in the “Volga” Case (ITLOS Reports 2002, p. 10, at paragraph 77). The ICJ and other international courts and tribunals have stated this 
view on a number of occasions (see, for example, Territorial Dispute (Libyan 
Arab Jamahiriya/Chad), Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 1994, p. 6, at paragraph 41; 
Oil Platforms (Islamic Republic of Iran v. United States of America), 
Preliminary Objection, Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 1996, p. 803, at paragraph 23;
Avena and Other Mexican Nationals (Mexico v. United States of America), 
Judgment, I.C.J. Reports 2004, p. 12, at paragraph 83; Pulp Mills on the River 
Uruguay (Argentina v. Uruguay), Judgment of 20 April 2010, paragraphs 
64-65; Delimitation of the Maritime Boundary between Guinea and GuineaBissau, Arbitral Tribunal, Award of 14 February 1985, UNRIAA, vol. XIX, 
pp. 149-196, 25 ILM (1986), p. 252, at paragraph 41; United States-Standards 
for Reformulated and Conventional Gasoline, Report of the Appellate Body 
(WT/DS2/AB/R), adopted by the Dispute Settlement Body of the World Trade 
Organization on 20 May 1996, DSR 1996:I, p. 3, at pp. 15-16).
58. In light of the foregoing, the rules of the Vienna Convention on the 
interpretation of treaties apply to the interpretation of provisions of the 
Convention and the 1994 Agreement.
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 29
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
59. The Chamber is also required to interpret instruments that are not treaties and, in particular, the Regulations adopted by the Authority, namely, the 
Regulations on Prospecting and Exploration for Polymetallic Nodules in the 
Area of 2000 (hereinafter “the Nodules Regulations”), and the Regulations on 
Prospecting and Exploration for Polymetallic Sulphides in the Area of 2010 
(hereinafter “the Sulphides Regulations”).
60. The fact that these instruments are binding texts negotiated by States 
and adopted through a procedure similar to that used in multilateral conferences permits the Chamber to consider that the interpretation rules set out in 
the Vienna Convention may, by analogy, provide guidance as to their interpretation. In the specific case before the Chamber, the analogy is strengthened 
because of the close connection between these texts and the Convention. The 
ICJ seems to have adopted a similar approach when it states in its advisory 
opinion on Accordance with International Law of the Unilateral Declaration 
of Independence in Respect of Kosovo, that the rules on interpretation of the 
Vienna Convention “may provide guidance” as regards the interpretation of 
resolutions of the United Nations Security Council (ICJ, 22 July 2010, paragraph 94).
Multilingual international instruments
61. In interpreting the provisions of the Convention, it should be borne in 
mind that it is a multilingual treaty: the Arabic, Chinese, English, French, 
Russian and Spanish texts are equally authentic (article 320 of the Convention). 
It should also be noted that these six languages are also official languages of 
the Council and that the Regulations of the Authority, as well as the decision 
of the Council containing the questions submitted to the Chamber, were 
adopted in those languages with the original in English.
62. The relevant provision to be considered in the present context is article 
33, paragraph 4, of the Vienna Convention. According to this provision, where 
no particular text prevails according to the treaty and where “a comparison of 
the authentic texts discloses a difference of meaning which the application of 
articles 31 and 32 does not remove, the meaning which best reconciles the 
texts, having regard to the object and purpose of the treaty, shall be adopted”.
63. An examination of the relevant provisions of the Convention reveals 
that the terminology used in the different language versions corresponds to the 
objective stated by the Drafting Committee of the Third United Nations 
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 30
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
Conference on the Law of the Sea, namely, “to improve linguistic concordance, to the extent possible, and to achieve juridical concordance in all cases” 
(Report of the Chairman of the Drafting Committee, 2 March 1981, 
A/CONF.62/L.67/Rev.1, in Third United Nations Conference on the Law of 
the Sea, Official Records, vol. XV, p.145, at paragraph 8). There are certain 
inconsistencies in the terminology used within the same language version and 
as between language versions. In the view of the Chamber, there is, however, 
no difference of meaning between the authentic texts of the relevant provisions 
of the Convention. A comparison between the terms used in these provisions 
of the Convention is nonetheless useful in clarifying their meaning.
Meaning of key terms
64. The meaning of the term “responsibility” as used in the English text 
of article 139, paragraphs 1 and 2; article 235, paragraph 1; and Annex III, 
article 4, paragraph 4, of the Convention (“States Parties shall have the responsibility to ensure”; “States are responsible for the fulfilment”; “States 
shall . . . have the responsibility to ensure”) does not correspond to the meaning 
of the same term in article 304 of the Convention (“responsibility and liability 
for damage”) and Annex III, article 22, of the Convention (“responsibility or 
liability for any damage”).
65. In article 139, article 235, paragraph 1, and Annex III, article 4, paragraph 4, of the Convention, the term “responsibility” means “obligation”. This 
emerges not only from the context of the aforementioned articles, but also from 
a comparison with other linguistic versions. The Spanish text uses the expression “estarán obligados” and the French text uses the more indirect but equally 
explicit expression “il incombe de”. Similarly, the Arabic text uses the expression “ملزمة تكون“. The Chinese text uses the term “义务” and the Russian text 
the term “обязательство”.
66. In the view of the Chamber, in the provisions cited in the previous 
paragraph, the term “responsibility” refers to the primary obligation whereas 
the term “liability” refers to the secondary obligation, namely, the consequences of a breach of the primary obligation. Notwithstanding their apparent 
similarity to the English term “responsibility”, the French term “responsabilité” and the Spanish term “responsabilidad”, respectively, indicate also the 
consequences of the breach of the primary obligation. The same applies to the 
Arabic term “مسؤولية“, the Chinese term “责任” and the Russian term 
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 31
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
“ответственность”. The fact that the International Law Commission’s 
Articles on Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts (hereinafter “the ILC Articles on State Responsibility”), adopted in 2001, give the 
term “responsibility” a meaning corresponding to “responsabilité”, “responsabilidad”, “مسؤولية“,” 责任” and “ответственность” may create confusion, 
which can be avoided by comparing the English text of article 139, article 235, 
and Annex III, article 4, paragraph 4, of the Convention with the other language versions.
67. It should be further observed that in article 235, paragraph 3, and 
Annex III, article 22, of the Convention, the English version of which uses the 
terms “responsibility and liability” together, the term “responsibility” has the 
same meaning as in the ILC Articles on State Responsibility. This is clear from 
a comparison of the English version with the French and Spanish versions, 
which use only the term “responsabilité” and “responsabilidad”. Similarly, the 
Arabic, Chinese and Russian versions use the term “مسؤولية“,” 责任” and 
“ответственность”, respectively.
68. This analysis of the terms used in the provisions of the Convention 
provides a basis for determining their meaning as used in the three 
Questions.
69. Thus, in Question 1, the expression “legal responsibilities and obligations” refers to primary obligations, that is, to what sponsoring States are 
obliged to do under the Convention.
70. In Question 2, the English term “liability” refers to the consequences 
of a breach of the sponsoring State’s obligations.
71. In Question 3, as in Question 1, “responsibility” means “obligation”. 
The terms “responsabilité” and “responsabilidad”, used, respectively, in the 
French and Spanish versions of Question 3, are translations of the English term 
“responsibility” and were apparently introduced for the sake of uniformity. 
However, in light of the English version and of the terminology used in the 
French and Spanish versions of article 139 of the Convention, the meaning 
intended is that of “obligation”. Similarly, the Arabic, Chinese and Russian 
versions of Question 3 use the term “مسؤولية“,” 义务” and “обязательство”, 
respectively.
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 32
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
Question 1
72. The first question submitted to the Chamber is as follows:
What are the legal responsibilities and obligations of States Parties to the 
Convention with respect to the sponsorship of activities in the Area in 
accordance with the Convention, in particular Part XI, and the 1994 
Agreement relating to the Implementation of Part XI of the United Nations 
Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982?
73. This question concerns the obligations of sponsoring States. Before 
examining the provisions of the Convention, the 1994 Agreement as well as 
the Nodules Regulations and the Sulphides Regulations (hereinafter “the 
Convention and related instruments”), the Chamber must determine the meaning of two of the terms used in the Question, namely: “sponsorship” and 
“activities in the Area”.
I. Sponsorship
74. The notion of “sponsorship” is a key element in the system for the 
exploration and exploitation of the resources of the Area set out in the 
Convention. Article 153, paragraph 2, of the Convention describes the “parallel system” of exploration and exploitation activities indicating that such 
activities shall be carried out by the Enterprise, and, in association with the 
Authority, by States Parties or state enterprises or natural or juridical persons. 
It further states that, in order to be eligible to carry out such activities, natural 
and juridical persons must satisfy two requirements. First, they must be either 
nationals of a State Party or effectively controlled by it or its nationals. Second, 
they must be “sponsored by such States”. Article 153, paragraph 2(b), of the 
Convention makes the requirement of sponsorship applicable also to state 
enterprises.
75. The purpose of requiring the sponsorship of applicants for contracts 
for the exploration and exploitation of the resources of the Area is to achieve 
the result that the obligations set out in the Convention, a treaty under international law which binds only States Parties thereto, are complied with by 
entities that are subjects of domestic legal systems. This result is obtained 
through the provisions of the Authority’s Regulations that apply to such 
entities and through the implementation by the sponsoring States of their obligations under the Convention and related instruments.
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 33
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
76. The role of the sponsoring State, as set out in the Convention, contributes to the realization of the common interest of all States in the proper application of the principle of the common heritage of mankind which requires 
faithful compliance with the obligations set out in Part XI. The commoninterest role of the sponsoring State is further confirmed by its obligation, set 
out in article 153, paragraph 4, of the Convention, to “assist” the Authority, 
which, as stated in article 137, paragraph 2, of the Convention, acts on behalf 
of mankind.
77. The connection between States Parties and domestic law entities 
required by the Convention is twofold, namely, that of nationality and that of 
effective control. All contractors and applicants for contracts must secure and 
maintain the sponsorship of the State or States of which they are nationals. If 
another State or its nationals exercises effective control, the sponsorship of that 
State is also necessary. This is provided for in Annex III, article 4, paragraph 
3, of the Convention and confirmed in regulation 11, paragraph 2, of the 
Nodules Regulations and of the Sulphides Regulations.
78. No provision of the Convention imposes an obligation on a State Party 
to sponsor an entity that holds its nationality or is controlled by it or by its 
nationals. As the Convention does not consider the links of nationality and 
effective control sufficient to obtain the result that the contractor conforms 
with the Convention and related instruments, it requires a specific act emanating from the will of the State or States of nationality and of effective control. 
Such act consists in the decision to sponsor.
79. As subjects of international law, States Parties engaged in deep seabed 
mining under the Convention are directly bound by the obligations set out 
therein. Consequently, there is no reason to apply to them the requirement of 
sponsorship. Article 153, paragraph 2(b), of the Convention as well as the 
identical regulation 11, paragraph 1, of the Nodules Regulations and the 
Sulphides Regulations confirm that the requirement of sponsorship does not 
apply to States. This point is further supported by Annex III, article 4, paragraph 5, of the Convention which reads as follows: “The procedures for assessing the qualifications of States Parties which are applicants shall take into 
account their character as States”.
80. The practice of the Authority, however, indicates that at least two 
contractor States, when applying for a contract, considered it necessary to 
submit to the Authority documents of sponsorship.
81. It may also be noted that all but one of the existing contractors, as 
“registered pioneer investors” under the provisional system set out in 
Resolution II of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea, 
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 34
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
obtained their contracts for exploration through the simplified procedure set 
out in section 1, paragraph 6(a)(ii) of the Annex to the 1994 Agreement. As 
“certifying States” under paragraph 1(c) of Resolution II, they stand in the 
same relationship to a pioneer investor as would a sponsoring State stand to a 
contractor pursuant to Annex III, article 4, of the Convention.
II. “Activities in the Area”
82. Question 1 concerns the responsibilities and obligations of sponsoring 
States in respect of “activities in the Area”. This expression is defined in article 
1, paragraph 1 (3), of the Convention as “all activities of exploration for, and 
exploitation of, the resources of the Area”. According to article 133 (a) of the 
Convention, for the purposes of Part XI, the term “resources” means “all solid, 
liquid or gaseous mineral resources in situ in the Area at or beneath the seabed, 
including polymetallic nodules”. The two definitions, however, do not indicate 
what is meant by “exploration” and “exploitation”. It is important to note that 
according to article 133 (b), “resources, when recovered from the Area, are 
referred to as ‘minerals’”.
83. Some indication of the meaning of the term “activities in the Area” 
may be found in Annex IV, article 1, paragraph 1, of the Convention. It reads 
as follows:
The Enterprise is the organ of the Authority which shall carry out activities 
in the Area directly, pursuant to article 153, paragraph 2(a), as well as the 
transporting, processing and marketing of minerals recovered from 
the Area.
84. This provision distinguishes “activities in the Area” which the 
Enterprise carries out directly pursuant to article 153, paragraph 2(a), of the 
Convention, from other activities with which the Enterprise is entrusted, 
namely, the transporting, processing and marketing of minerals recovered 
from the Area. Consequently, the latter activities are not included in the notion 
of “activities in the Area” referred to in Annex IV, article 1, paragraph 1, of the 
Convention.
85.  Article 145 of the Convention, which prescribes the taking of 
“[n]ecessary measures . . . with respect to activities in the Area to ensure 
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 35
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
effective protection for the marine environment from harmful effects which 
may arise from such activities”, indicates the activities in respect of which the 
Authority should adopt rules, regulations and procedures. These activities 
include: “drilling, dredging, excavation, disposal of waste, construction and 
operation or maintenance of installations, pipelines and other devices related 
to such activities”. In the view of the Chamber, these activities are included in 
the notion of “activities in the Area”.
86. Annex III, article 17, paragraph 2(f ), of the Convention, which sets 
out the criteria for the rules, regulations and procedures concerning protection 
of the marine environment to be drawn up by the Authority gives further useful 
indications of what is included in the notion of “activities in the Area”. The 
provision reads as follows:
Rules, regulations and procedures shall be drawn up in order to secure 
effective protection of the marine environment from harmful effects 
directly resulting from activities in the Area or from shipboard processing 
immediately above a mine site of minerals derived from that mine site, 
taking into account the extent to which such harmful effects may directly 
result from drilling, dredging, coring and excavation and from disposal, 
dumping and discharge into the marine environment of sediment, wastes 
or other effluents.
87. The provisions considered in the preceding paragraphs confirm that 
processing and transporting as mentioned in Annex IV, article 1, paragraph 1, 
of the Convention are excluded from the notion of “activities in the Area”. 
They set out lists of activities whose harmful effects are indicated as directly 
resulting from such activities. These lists may be seen as an indication of what 
the Convention considers as included in the notion of “activities in the Area”. 
These activities include: drilling, dredging, coring, and excavation; disposal, 
dumping and discharge into the marine environment of sediment, wastes or 
other effluents; and construction and operation or maintenance of installations, 
pipelines and other devices related to such activities.
88. Under Annex III, article 17, paragraph 2(f ), of the Convention, “shipboard processing immediately above a mine site of minerals derived from that 
mine site” is to be considered as included in “activities in the Area”. As the 
aforementioned list of activities refers without distinction to the harmful 
effects resulting directly from “activities in the Area” and from “shipboard 
processing”, the two are to be seen as part of the same kind of activities.
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 36
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
89. The Nodules Regulations and the Sulphides Regulations define 
“exploration” and “exploitation” in the context of polymetallic nodules and 
polymetallic sulphides, respectively. According to regulation 1, paragraph 3(b) 
and (a), of the Nodules Regulations:
“Exploration” means searching for deposits of polymetallic nodules in the 
Area with exclusive rights, the analysis of such deposits, the testing of 
collecting systems and equipment, processing facilities and transportation 
systems, and the carrying out of studies of the environmental, technical, 
economic, commercial and other appropriate factors that must be taken 
into account in exploitation.
“Exploitation” means the recovery for commercial purposes of polymetallic nodules in the Area and the extraction of minerals therefrom, including 
the construction and operation of mining, processing and transportation 
systems for the production and marketing of metals.
90. The same definitions are set out in regulation 1, paragraph 3(b) and 
(a), of the Sulphides Regulations.
91. These provisions of the Nodules Regulations and the Sulphides 
Regulations include in the notion of exploration the testing of processing 
facilities and transportation systems and in that of exploitation the construction 
and operation of processing and transportation systems.
92. The scope of “exploration” and “exploitation” as defined in the 
Regulations seems broader than the “activities in the Area” envisaged in 
Annex IV, article 1, paragraph 1, and in article 145 and Annex III, article 17, 
paragraph 2 (f), of the Convention. Processing and transportation are included 
in the notion of exploration and exploitation of the Regulations, but not in that 
of “activities in the Area” in the provision of Annex IV of the Convention, 
which has just been cited.
93. The difference in scope of “activities in the Area” in the provisions of 
the Convention and in the Nodules Regulations and the Sulphides Regulations 
makes it necessary to examine the relevant provisions within the broader 
framework of the Convention. It would seem preferable to consider that the 
meaning of “activities in the Area” in articles 139 and Annex III, article 4, 
paragraph 4, of the Convention is consistent with that of article 145 and Annex 
III, article 17, paragraph 2(f), and Annex IV, article 1, paragraph 1, rather than 
with that of “exploration” and “exploitation” in the two Regulations. The 
aforementioned articles of the Convention and of Annexes III and IV, all 
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 37
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
belong to the same legal instrument. They were negotiated by the same parties 
and adopted at the same time. It therefore seems reasonable to assume that the 
meaning of an expression (or the exclusion of certain activities from the scope 
of that expression) in one provision also applies to the others. The Regulations 
are instruments subordinate to the Convention, which, if not in conformity 
with it, should be interpreted so as to ensure consistency with its provisions. 
They may, nevertheless be used to clarify and supplement certain aspects of 
the relevant provisions of the Convention.
94. In light of the above, the expression “activities in the Area”, in the 
context of both exploration and exploitation, includes, first of all, the recovery 
of minerals from the seabed and their lifting to the water surface.
95. Activities directly connected with those mentioned in the previous 
paragraph such as the evacuation of water from the minerals and the preliminary separation of materials of no commercial interest, including their disposal 
at sea, are deemed to be covered by the expression “activities in the Area”. 
“Processing”, namely, the process through which metals are extracted from the 
minerals and which is normally conducted at a plant situated on land, is 
excluded from the expression “activities in the Area”. This is confirmed by the 
wording of Annex IV, article 1, paragraph 1, of the Convention as well as by 
information provided by the Authority at the request of the Chamber.
96. Transportation to points on land from the part of the high seas superjacent to the part of the Area in which the contractor operates cannot be 
included in the notion of “activities in the Area”, as it would be incompatible 
with the exclusion of transportation from “activities in the Area” in Annex IV, 
article 1, paragraph 1, of the Convention. However, transportation within that 
part of the high seas, when directly connected with extraction and lifting, 
should be included in activities in the Area. In the case of polymetallic nodules, 
this applies, for instance, to transportation between the ship or installation 
where the lifting process ends and another ship or installation where the 
evacuation of water and the preliminary separation and disposal of material to 
be discarded take place. The inclusion of transportation to points on land could 
create an unnecessary conflict with provisions of the Convention such as those 
that concern navigation on the high seas.
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 38
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
97. One consequence of the exclusion of water evacuation and disposal of 
material from “activities in the Area” would be that the activities conducted by 
the contractor which are among the most hazardous to the environment would 
be excluded from those to which the responsibilities of the sponsoring 
State apply. This would be contrary to the general obligation of States Parties, 
under article 192 of the Convention, “to protect and preserve the marine environment”.
III. Prospecting
98. “Prospecting”, although mentioned in Annex III, article 2, of the 
Convention and in the Nodules Regulations and the Sulphides Regulations, is 
not included in the Convention’s definition of “activities in the Area” because 
the Convention and the two Regulations distinguish it from “exploration” and 
from “exploitation”. Moreover, under the Convention and related instruments, 
prospecting does not require sponsorship. In conformity with the questions 
submitted to it, which relate to “activities in the Area” and to sponsoring 
States, the Chamber will not address prospecting activities. However, considering that prospecting is often treated as the preliminary phase of exploration 
in mining practice and legislation, the Chamber considers it appropriate to 
observe that some aspects of the present Advisory Opinion may also apply to 
prospecting.
IV. Responsibilities and obligations
Key provisions
99. The key provisions concerning the obligations of the sponsoring 
States are: article 139, paragraph 1; article 153, paragraph 4 (especially the last 
sentence); and Annex III, article 4, paragraph 4, of the Convention (especially 
the first sentence).
100. These provisions read:
Article 139, paragraph 1
States Parties shall have the responsibility to ensure that activities in the 
Area, whether carried out by States Parties, or state enterprises or natural 
or juridical persons which possess the nationality of States Parties or are 
effectively controlled by them or their nationals, shall be carried out in 
conformity with this Part. The same responsibility applies to international 
organizations for activities in the Area carried out by such organizations.
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 39
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
Article 153, paragraph 4
The Authority shall exercise such control over activities in the Area as is 
necessary for the purpose of securing compliance with the relevant provisions of this Part and the Annexes relating thereto, and the rules, regulations and procedures of the Authority, and the plans of work approved in 
accordance with paragraph 3. States Parties shall assist the Authority by 
taking all measures necessary to ensure such compliance in accordance 
with article 139.
Annex III, article 4, paragraph 4
The sponsoring State or States shall, pursuant to article 139, have the 
responsibility to ensure, within their legal systems, that a contractor so 
sponsored shall carry out activities in the Area in conformity with the 
terms of its contract and its obligations under this Convention. A sponsoring State shall not, however, be liable for damage caused by any failure of 
a contractor sponsored by it to comply with its obligations if that State 
Party has adopted laws and regulations and taken administrative measures 
which are, within the framework of its legal system, reasonably appropriate for securing compliance by persons under its jurisdiction.
101. A perusal of these three provisions reveals that article 139 plays a 
central role, as it is referred to both in article 153, paragraph 4, and in Annex 
III, article 4, paragraph 4, of the Convention. While Annex III, article 4, paragraph 4, of the Convention refers to sponsoring States, articles 139, paragraph 
1, and 153, paragraph 4, of the Convention do not do so explicitly. However, 
since the entities which conduct activities in the Area mentioned in article 139, 
paragraph 1, of the Convention can do so only when there is a State Party 
sponsoring them, all three provisions must be read as referring to sponsoring 
States.
102. It is important to note that the last sentence of article 153, paragraph 
4, of the Convention places the obligation of the sponsoring State in relationship with the obligations of the Authority by stating that the former has the 
obligation to “assist” the latter. As will be seen in the reply to Question 2, the 
subordinate role of the sponsoring State is reflected in Annex III, article 22, of 
the Convention, in which the liability of the contractor and of the Authority is 
mentioned while that of the sponsoring State is not (see paragraph 199).
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 40
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
Obligations of the contractor whose compliance the sponsoring State must 
ensure
103. The three provisions mentioned in paragraph 100 specify that the 
obligation (responsibility) of the sponsoring State is “to ensure” that the 
“activities in the Area” conducted by the sponsored contractor are “in conformity” or in “compliance” with the rules to which they refer.
104. These rules are referred to as “this Part” (Part XI) in article 139 of 
the Convention, as “the relevant provisions of this Part and the Annexes relating thereto, and the rules, regulations and procedures of the Authority, and the 
plans of work approved in accordance with paragraph 3” in article 153, paragraph 4, of the Convention, and as “the terms of its contract and its obligations 
under this Convention” in Annex III, article 4, paragraph 4, of the 
Convention.
105. The difference between the references contained in articles 139 and 
153 of the Convention, cited in the previous paragraphs, is only one of drafting. 
The reference to Part XI in article 139 of the Convention includes Annexes III 
and IV. In the view of the Chamber, this reference also includes the rules, 
regulations and procedures of the Authority and the contracts (or plans of 
work) for exploration and exploitation, which are based on Part XI and the 
relevant Annexes thereto.
106. The reference to the contractor’s “obligations under this Convention” 
in Annex III, article 4, paragraph 4, would seem to be broader than the references in articles 139 and 153 of the Convention. This difference would be 
relevant if there were obligations of sponsored contractors set out in parts of 
the Convention other than Part XI and the annexes thereto, the rules, regulations and procedures of the Authority, or the relevant contracts. As this is not 
the case, it would appear that the scope of the obligations of sponsored contractors, although indicated differently in the three key provisions of the 
Convention referred to in paragraph 100, is in fact substantially the same.
“Responsibility to ensure”
107. The central issue in relation to Question 1 concerns the meaning of 
the expression “responsibility to ensure” in article 139, paragraph 1, and 
Annex III, article 4, paragraph 4, of the Convention.
108. “Responsibility to ensure” points to an obligation of the sponsoring 
State under international law. It establishes a mechanism through which the 
rules of the Convention concerning activities in the Area, although being treaty 
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 41
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
law and thus binding only on the subjects of international law that have 
accepted them, become effective for sponsored contractors which find their 
legal basis in domestic law. This mechanism consists in the creation of obligations which States Parties must fulfil by exercising their power over entities of 
their nationality and under their control.
109. As will be seen in greater detail in the reply to Question 2, a violation 
of this obligation entails “liability”. However, not every violation of an obligation by a sponsored contractor automatically gives rise to the liability of the 
sponsoring State. Such liability is limited to the State’s failure to meet its obligation to “ensure” compliance by the sponsored contractor.
110. The sponsoring State’s obligation “to ensure” is not an obligation to 
achieve, in each and every case, the result that the sponsored contractor complies with the aforementioned obligations. Rather, it is an obligation to deploy 
adequate means, to exercise best possible efforts, to do the utmost, to obtain 
this result. To utilize the terminology current in international law, this obligation may be characterized as an obligation “of conduct” and not “of result”, and 
as an obligation of “due diligence”.
111. The notions of obligations “of due diligence” and obligations “of 
conduct” are connected. This emerges clearly from the Judgment of the ICJ in 
the Pulp Mills on the River Uruguay: “An obligation to adopt regulatory or 
administrative measures . . . and to enforce them is an obligation of conduct. 
Both parties are therefore called upon, under article 36 [of the Statute of the 
River Uruguay], to exercise due diligence in acting through the [Uruguay 
River] Commission for the necessary measures to preserve the ecological balance of the river” (paragraph 187 of the Judgment).
112. The expression “to ensure” is often used in international legal instruments to refer to obligations in respect of which, while it is not considered 
reasonable to make a State liable for each and every violation committed by 
persons under its jurisdiction, it is equally not considered satisfactory to rely 
on mere application of the principle that the conduct of private persons or entities is not attributable to the State under international law (see ILC Articles on 
State Responsibility, Commentary to article 8, paragraph 1).
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 42
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
113. An example may be found in article 194, paragraph 2, of the 
Convention which reads: “States shall take all measures necessary to ensure 
that activities under their jurisdiction or control are so conducted as not to 
cause damage by pollution to other States and their environment . . .”.
114. The nature of the obligation to “ensure” in article 139 of the 
Convention and in the other provisions mentioned in paragraph 100 appears 
even more clearly in light of the French and Spanish texts of article 139 
of the Convention. They use respectively the expression “il incombe aux 
Etats Parties de veiller à . . .” and “los Estados Partes estarán obligados a 
velar”. “Veiller à” and “velar” point out, even more clearly than “ensure”, 
the idea of exercising diligence. The Arabic text uses the expression 
“ ملزمة األطراف الدول تكون بضمان“ , the Chinese text uses the expression “缔约
国应有责任确保” and the Russian text uses the expression “Государстваучастники обязуются обеспечивать”, which point in the same direction.
115. In its Judgment in the Pulp Mills on the River Uruguay case, the ICJ 
illustrates the meaning of a specific treaty obligation that it had qualified as “an 
obligation to act with due diligence” as follows:
It is an obligation which entails not only the adoption of appropriate rules 
and measures, but also a certain level of vigilance in their enforcement and 
the exercise of administrative control applicable to public and private 
operators, such as the monitoring of activities undertaken by such operators . . . (Paragraph 197)
116. Similar indications are given by the International Law Commission 
in its Commentary to article 3 of its Articles on Prevention of Transboundary 
Harm from Hazardous Activities, adopted in 2001. According to article 3, the 
State of origin of the activities involving a risk of causing transboundary harm 
“shall take all appropriate measures to prevent significant transboundary harm 
or at any event to minimize the risk thereof”. The Commentary states:
The obligation of the State of origin to take preventive or minimization 
measures is one of due diligence. It is the conduct of the State of origin that 
will determine whether the State has complied with its obligation under the 
present articles. The duty of due diligence involved, however, is not 
intended to guarantee that significant harm be totally prevented, if it is not 
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 43
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
possible to do so. In that eventuality, the State of origin is required . . . to 
exert its best possible efforts to minimize the risk. In this sense, it does not 
guarantee that the harm would not occur. (Paragraph 7)
The content of the “due diligence” obligation to ensure
117. The content of “due diligence” obligations may not easily be 
described in precise terms. Among the factors that make such a description 
difficult is the fact that “due diligence” is a variable concept. It may change 
over time as measures considered sufficiently diligent at a certain moment may 
become not diligent enough in light, for instance, of new scientific or technological knowledge. It may also change in relation to the risks involved in the 
activity. As regards activities in the Area, it seems reasonable to state that 
prospecting is, generally speaking, less risky than exploration activities which, 
in turn, entail less risk than exploitation. Moreover, activities in the Area concerning different kinds of minerals, for example, polymetallic nodules on the 
one hand and polymetallic sulphides or cobalt rich ferromanganese crusts on 
the other, may require different standards of diligence. The standard of due 
diligence has to be more severe for the riskier activities.
118. Article 153, paragraph 4, last sentence, of the Convention states that 
the obligation of the sponsoring State in accordance with article 139 of the 
Convention entails “taking all measures necessary to ensure” compliance by 
the sponsored contractor. Annex III, article 4, paragraph 4, of the Convention 
makes it clear that sponsoring States’ “responsibility to ensure” applies “within 
their legal systems”. With these indications the Convention provides some 
elements concerning the content of the “due diligence” obligation to ensure. 
Necessary measures are required and these must be adopted within the legal 
system of the sponsoring State.
119. Further light on the expression “measures necessary to ensure” is 
shed by the Convention if one considers article 139, paragraph 2, last sentence, 
and Annex III, article 4, paragraph 4, last sentence, of the Convention. The 
main purpose of these provisions is to exempt sponsoring States that have 
taken certain measures from liability for damage. The description of the measures to be taken by that State may also be used to clarify its “due diligence” 
obligation. This description remains in general terms in article 139, paragraph 
2, of the Convention which mentions “all necessary and appropriate measures 
to secure effective compliance under article 153, paragraph 4, and Annex III, 
article 4, paragraph 4”. The latter provision is more specific as it requires the 
sponsoring State to adopt “laws and regulations” and to take “administrative 
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 44
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
measures which are, within the framework of its legal system, reasonably 
appropriate for securing compliance by persons under its jurisdiction”.
120. More specific indications concerning the content of these measures, 
including aspects relating to their enforcement, with respect to the contents of 
these measures will be provided in the reply to Question 3. As regards Question 
1, it has been established that the “due diligence” obligation “to ensure” 
requires the sponsoring State to take measures within its legal system and that 
the measures must be “reasonably appropriate”.
V. Direct obligations of sponsoring States
121. The obligations of sponsoring States are not limited to the due diligence “obligation to ensure”. Under the Convention and related instruments, 
sponsoring States also have obligations with which they have to comply independently of their obligation to ensure a certain behaviour by the sponsored 
contractor. These obligations may be characterized as “direct obligations”.
122. Among the most important of these direct obligations incumbent on 
sponsoring States are: the obligation to assist the Authority in the exercise of 
control over activities in the Area; the obligation to apply a precautionary 
approach; the obligation to apply best environmental practices; the obligation 
to take measures to ensure the provision of guarantees in the event of an emergency order by the Authority for protection of the marine environment; the 
obligation to ensure the availability of recourse for compensation in respect of 
damage caused by pollution; and the obligation to conduct environmental 
impact assessments. These obligations will be examined in paragraphs 
124-150.
123. It must nevertheless be stated, at the outset, that compliance with 
these obligations can also be seen as a relevant factor in meeting the due diligence “obligation to ensure” and that the said obligations are in most cases 
couched as obligations to ensure compliance with a specific rule.
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 45
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
The obligation to assist the Authority
124. Pursuant to the last sentence of article 153, paragraph 4, of the 
Convention, sponsoring States have the obligation to assist the Authority in its 
task of controlling activities in the Area for the purpose of ensuring compliance 
with the relevant provisions of Part XI of the Convention and related instruments. This obligation is to be met “by taking all measures necessary to ensure 
such compliance in accordance with article 139”. The obligation of the sponsoring States is a direct one, but it is to be met through compliance with the 
“due diligence obligation” set out in article 139 of the Convention.
Precautionary approach
125. The Nodules Regulations and the Sulphides Regulations contain 
provisions that establish a direct obligation for sponsoring States. This obligation is relevant for implementing the “responsibility to ensure” that sponsored 
contractors meet the obligations set out in Part XI of the Convention and 
related instruments. These are regulation 31, paragraph 2, of the Nodules 
Regulations and regulation 33, paragraph 2, of the Sulphides Regulations, both 
of which state that sponsoring States (as well as the Authority) “shall apply a 
precautionary approach, as reflected in Principle 15 of the Rio Declaration” in 
order “to ensure effective protection for the marine environment from harmful 
effects which may arise from activities in the Area”.
126. Principle 15 of the 1992 Rio Declaration on Environment and 
Development (hereinafter “the Rio Declaration”) reads:
In order to protect the environment, the precautionary approach shall be 
widely applied by States according to their capabilities. Where there are 
threats of serious or irreversible damage, lack of full scientific certainty 
shall not be used as a reason for postponing cost-effective measures to 
prevent environmental degradation.
127. The provisions of the aforementioned Regulations transform this 
non-binding statement of the precautionary approach in the Rio Declaration 
into a binding obligation. The implementation of the precautionary approach 
as defined in these Regulations is one of the obligations of sponsoring States.
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 46
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
128. It should be noted that while the first sentence of Principle 15 seems 
to refer in general terms to the “precautionary approach”, the second 
sentence limits its scope to threats of “serious or irreversible damage” and to 
“cost-effective” measures adopted in order to prevent “environmental 
degradation”.
129. Moreover, by stating that the precautionary approach shall be applied 
by States “according to their capabilities”, the first sentence of Principle 15 
introduces the possibility of differences in application of the precautionary 
approach in light of the different capabilities of each State (see paragraphs 
151-163).
130. The reference to the precautionary approach as set out in the two 
Regulations applies specifically to the activities envisaged therein, namely, 
prospecting and exploration for polymetallic nodules and polymetallic sulphides. It is to be expected that the Authority will either repeat or further develop 
this approach when it regulates exploitation activities and activities concerning 
other types of minerals.
131. Having established that under the Nodules Regulations and the 
Sulphides Regulations, both sponsoring States and the Authority are under an 
obligation to apply the precautionary approach in respect of activities in the 
Area, it is appropriate to point out that the precautionary approach is also an 
integral part of the general obligation of due diligence of sponsoring States, 
which is applicable even outside the scope of the Regulations. The due diligence obligation of the sponsoring States requires them to take all appropriate 
measures to prevent damage that might result from the activities of contractors 
that they sponsor. This obligation applies in situations where scientific evidence concerning the scope and potential negative impact of the activity in 
question is insufficient but where there are plausible indications of potential 
risks. A sponsoring State would not meet its obligation of due diligence if it 
disregarded those risks. Such disregard would amount to a failure to comply 
with the precautionary approach.
132. The link between an obligation of due diligence and the precautionary approach is implicit in the Tribunal’s Order of 27 August 1999 in the 
Southern Bluefin Tuna Cases (New Zealand v. Japan; Australia v. Japan). 
This emerges from the declaration of the Tribunal that the parties “should in 
the circumstances act with prudence and caution to ensure that conservation 
measures are taken . . .” (ITLOS Reports 1999, p. 274, at paragraph 77), and is 
confirmed by the further statements that “there is scientific uncertainty regarding measures to be taken to conserve the stock of southern bluefin tuna” 
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 47
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
(paragraph 79) and that “although the Tribunal cannot conclusively assess the 
scientific evidence presented by the parties, it finds that measures should be 
taken as a matter of urgency” (paragraph 80).
133. It should be further noted that the Sulphides Regulations, Annex 4, 
section 5.1, in setting out a “standard clause” for exploration contracts, provides that:
The Contractor shall take necessary measures to prevent, reduce and control pollution and other hazards to the marine environment arising from its 
activities in the Area as far as reasonably possible applying a precautionary approach and best environmental practices.
Thus, the precautionary approach (called “principle” in the French text of the 
standard clause just mentioned) is a contractual obligation of the sponsored 
contractors whose compliance the sponsoring State has the responsibility to 
ensure.
134. In the parallel provision of the corresponding standard clauses for 
exploration contracts in the Nodules Regulations, Annex 4, section 5.1, no 
reference is made to the precautionary approach. However, under the general 
obligation illustrated in paragraph 131, the sponsoring State has to take measures within the framework of its own legal system in order to oblige sponsored entities to adopt such an approach.
135. The Chamber observes that the precautionary approach has been 
incorporated into a growing number of international treaties and other instruments, many of which reflect the formulation of Principle 15 of the Rio 
Declaration. In the view of the Chamber, this has initiated a trend towards 
making this approach part of customary international law. This trend is clearly 
reinforced by the inclusion of the precautionary approach in the Regulations 
and in the “standard clause” contained in Annex 4, section 5.1, of the Sulphides 
Regulations. So does the following statement in paragraph 164 of the ICJ 
Judgment in Pulp Mills on the River Uruguay that “a precautionary approach 
may be relevant in the interpretation and application of the provisions of the 
Statute” (i.e., the environmental bilateral treaty whose interpretation was the 
main bone of contention between the parties). This statement may be read in 
light of article 31, paragraph 3(c), of the Vienna Convention, according to 
which the interpretation of a treaty should take into account not only the context but “any relevant rules of international law applicable in the relations 
between the parties”.
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 48
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
Best environmental practices
136. Moreover, regulation 33, paragraph 2, of the Sulphides Regulations 
supplements the sponsoring State’s obligation to apply the precautionary 
approach with an obligation to apply “best environmental practices”. The same 
obligation is established as a contractual obligation in section 5.1 of Annex 4 
(Standard Clauses for exploration contracts) of the Sulphides Regulations. 
There is no reference to “best environmental practices” in the Nodules 
Regulations; their standard contract clause (Annex 4, section 5.1), merely 
refers to the “best technology” available to the contractor. The adoption of 
higher standards in the more recent Sulphides Regulations would seem to 
indicate that, in light of the advancement in scientific knowledge, member 
States of the Authority have become convinced of the need for sponsoring 
States to apply “best environmental practices” in general terms so that they 
may be seen to have become enshrined in the sponsoring States’ obligation of 
due diligence.
137. In the absence of a specific reason to the contrary, it may be held that 
the Nodules Regulations should be interpreted in light of the development of 
the law, as evidenced by the subsequent adoption of the Sulphides 
Regulations.
Guarantees in the event of an emergency order by the Authority for protection of the marine environment
138. Another obligation which is directly incumbent on the sponsoring 
State is set out in regulation 32, paragraph 7, of the Nodules Regulations and 
in regulation 35, paragraph 8, of the Sulphides Regulations. This obligation 
arises where the contractor has not provided the Council “with a guarantee of 
its financial and technical capability to comply promptly with emergency 
orders or to assure that the Council can take such emergency measures”. In 
such a case, under regulation 32, paragraph 7, of the Nodules Regulations:
the sponsoring State or States shall, in response to a request by the 
Secretary-General and pursuant to articles 139 and 235 of the Convention, 
take necessary measures to ensure that the contractor provides such a 
guarantee or shall take measures to ensure that assistance is provided to the 
Authority in the discharge of its responsibilities under paragraph 6.
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 49
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
Regulation 35, paragraph 8, of the Sulphides Regulations contains an 
identical provision.
Availability of recourse for compensation
139. Another direct obligation that gives substance to the sponsoring 
State’s obligation to adopt laws and regulations within the framework of its 
legal system is set out in article 235, paragraph 2, of the Convention. This 
provision reads as follows:
States shall ensure that recourse is available in accordance with their legal 
systems for prompt and adequate compensation or other relief in respect 
of damage caused by pollution of the marine environment by natural or 
juridical persons under their jurisdiction.
140. This provision applies to the sponsoring State as the State with jurisdiction over the persons that caused the damage. By requiring the sponsoring 
State to establish procedures, and, if necessary, substantive rules governing 
claims for damages before its domestic courts, this provision serves the purpose of ensuring that the sponsored contractor meets its obligation under 
Annex III, article 22, of the Convention to provide reparation for damages 
caused by wrongful acts committed in the course of its activities in the Area.
VI. Environmental impact assessment
141. The obligation of the contractor to conduct an environmental impact 
assessment is explicitly set out in section 1, paragraph 7, of the Annex to the 
1994 Agreement as follows: “An application for approval of a plan of work 
shall be accompanied by an assessment of the potential environmental impacts 
of the proposed activities . . . ”. The sponsoring State is under a due diligence 
obligation to ensure compliance by the sponsored contractor with this 
obligation.
142. Regulation 31, paragraph 6, of the Nodules Regulations and regulation 33, paragraph 6, of the Sulphides Regulations establish a direct obligation 
of the sponsoring State concerning environmental impact assessment, which 
can also be read as a relevant factor for meeting the sponsoring State’s due 
diligence obligation. This obligation is linked to the direct obligation of assisting the Authority considered at paragraph 124. The abovementioned provisions of the two Regulations read as follows: “[c]ontractors, sponsoring States 
and other interested States or entities shall cooperate with the Authority in the 
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 50
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
establishment and implementation of programmes for monitoring and evaluating the impacts of deep seabed mining on the marine environment”. This 
provision is designed to clarify and ensure compliance with the sponsoring 
State’s obligation to cooperate with the Authority in the exercise of the latter’s 
control over activities in the Area under article 153, paragraph 4, of the 
Convention, and of its general obligation of due diligence under article 139 
thereof. The sponsoring State is obliged not only to cooperate with the 
Authority in the establishment and implementation of impact assessments, but 
also to use appropriate means to ensure that the contractor complies with its 
obligation to conduct an environmental impact assessment.
143. Contractors and sponsoring States must cooperate with the Authority 
in the establishment of monitoring programmes to evaluate the impact 
of deep seabed mining on the marine environment, particularly through the 
creation of “impact reference zones” and “preservation reference zones” 
(regulation 31, paragraphs 6 and 7, of the Nodules Regulations and regulation 
33, paragraph 6, of the Sulphides Regulations). A comparison between environmental conditions in the “impact reference zone” and in the “preservation 
reference zone” makes it possible to assess the impact of activities in 
the Area.
144. As clarified in paragraph 10 of the Recommendations for the 
Guidance of the Contractors for the Assessment of the Possible Environmental 
Impacts Arising from Exploration for Polymetallic Nodules in the Area, issued 
by the Authority’s Legal and Technical Commission in 2002 pursuant to regulation 38 of the Nodules Regulations (ISBA/7/LTC/1/Rev.1 of 13 February 
2002), certain activities require “prior environmental impact assessment, as 
well as an environmental monitoring programme”. These activities are listed 
in paragraph 10 (a) to (c) of the Recommendations.
145. It should be stressed that the obligation to conduct an environmental 
impact assessment is a direct obligation under the Convention and a general 
obligation under customary international law.
146. As regards the Convention, article 206 states the following:
When States have reasonable grounds for believing that planned activities 
under their jurisdiction or control may cause substantial pollution of or 
significant and harmful changes to the marine environment, they shall, as 
far as practicable, assess the potential effects of such activities on the 
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 51
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
marine environment and shall communicate reports of the results of such 
assessments in the manner provided in article 205.
[Article 205 refers to an obligation to publish reports.]
147. With respect to customary international law, the ICJ, in its Judgment 
in Pulp Mills on the River Uruguay, speaks of:
a practice, which in recent years has gained so much acceptance among 
States that it may now be considered a requirement under general international law to undertake an environmental impact assessment where there 
is a risk that the proposed industrial activity may have a significant adverse 
impact in a transboundary context, in particular, on a shared resource. 
Moreover, due diligence, and the duty of vigilance and prevention which 
it implies, would not be considered to have been exercised, if a party planning works liable to affect the régime of the river or the quality of its 
waters did not undertake an environmental impact assessment on the 
potential effects of such works. (Paragraph 204)
148. Although aimed at the specific situation under discussion by the 
Court, the language used seems broad enough to cover activities in the Area 
even beyond the scope of the Regulations. The Court’s reasoning in a transboundary context may also apply to activities with an impact on the environment in an area beyond the limits of national jurisdiction; and the Court’s 
references to “shared resources” may also apply to resources that are the common heritage of mankind. Thus, in light of the customary rule mentioned by 
the ICJ, it may be considered that environmental impact assessments should be 
included in the system of consultations and prior notifications set out in article 
142 of the Convention with respect to “resource deposits in the Area which lie 
across limits of national jurisdiction”.
149. It must, however, be observed that, in the view of the ICJ, general 
international law does not “specify the scope and content of an environmental impact assessment” (paragraph 205 of the Judgment in Pulp Mills on the 
River Uruguay). While article 206 of the Convention gives only few indications of this scope and content, the indications in the Regulations, and 
especially in the Recommendations referred to in paragraph 144, add precision and specificity to the obligation as it applies in the context of activities 
in the Area.
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 52
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
150. In light of the above, the Chamber is of the view that the obligations 
of the contractors and of the sponsoring States concerning environmental 
impact assessments extend beyond the scope of application of specific provisions of the Regulations.
VII. Interests and needs of developing States
151. With respect to activities in the Area, the fifth preambular paragraph 
of the Convention states that the achievement of the goals set out in previous 
preambular paragraphs:
will contribute to the realization of a just and equitable international economic order which takes into account the interests and needs of mankind 
as a whole and, in particular, the special interests and needs of developing 
countries, whether coastal or land-locked.
152. Accordingly, it is necessary to examine whether developing sponsoring States enjoy preferential treatment as compared with that granted to developed sponsoring States under the Convention and related instruments.
153. Under article 140, paragraph 1, of the Convention:
Activities in the Area shall, as specifically provided for in this Part, be carried out for the benefit of mankind as a whole, irrespective of the geographical location of States, whether coastal or land-locked, and taking 
into particular consideration the interests and needs of developing 
States . . .
154. According to article 148 of the Convention:
The effective participation of developing States in activities in the Area 
shall be promoted as specifically provided for in this Part, having due 
regard to their special interests and needs, and in particular to the special 
needs of the land-locked and geographically disadvantaged among them 
to overcome obstacles arising from their disadvantaged location, including 
remoteness from the Area and difficulty of access to and from it.
155. These provisions develop, with respect to activities in the Area, the 
statement in the fifth preambular paragraph of the Convention.
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 53
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
156. For the purposes of the present Advisory Opinion, and in particular 
of Question 1, it is important to determine the meaning of article 148 of the 
Convention. According to this provision, the general purpose of promoting the 
participation of developing States in activities in the Area taking into account 
their special interests and needs is to be achieved “as specifically provided for” 
in Part XI (an expression also found in article 140 of the Convention). This 
means that there is no general clause for the consideration of such interests and 
needs beyond what is provided for in specific provisions of Part XI of the 
Convention. A perusal of Part XI shows immediately that there are several 
provisions designed to ensure the participation of developing States in 
activities in the Area and to take into particular consideration their interests 
and needs.
157. The approach of the Convention to this is particularly evident in the 
provisions granting a preference to developing States that wish to engage in 
mining in areas of the deep seabed reserved for the Authority (Annex III, 
articles 8 and 9, of the Convention); in the obligation of States to promote 
international cooperation in marine scientific research in the Area in order to 
ensure that programmes are developed “for the benefit of developing States” 
(article 143, paragraph 3, of the Convention); and in the obligation of the 
Authority and of States Parties to promote the transfer of technology to developing States (article 144, paragraph 1, of the Convention and section 5 of the 
Annex to the 1994 Agreement), and to provide training opportunities for personnel from developing States (article 144, paragraph 2, of the Convention and 
section 5 of the Annex to the 1994 Agreement); in the permission granted to 
the Authority in the exercise of its powers and functions to give special consideration to developing States, notwithstanding the rule against discrimination (article 152 of the Convention); and in the obligation of the Council to take 
“into particular consideration the interests and needs of developing States” in 
recommending, and approving, respectively, rules regulations and procedures 
on the equitable sharing of financial and other benefits derived from activities 
in the Area (articles 160, paragraph 2(f)(i), and 162, paragraph 2(o)(i), of the 
Convention).
158. However, none of the general provisions of the Convention concerning the responsibilities (or the liability) of the sponsoring State “specifically 
provides” for according preferential treatment to sponsoring States that are 
developing States. As observed above, there is no provision requiring the consideration of such interests and needs beyond what is specifically stated in Part 
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 54
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
XI. It may therefore be concluded that the general provisions concerning the 
responsibilities and liability of the sponsoring State apply equally to all sponsoring States, whether developing or developed.
159. Equality of treatment between developing and developed sponsoring 
States is consistent with the need to prevent commercial enterprises based in 
developed States from setting up companies in developing States, acquiring 
their nationality and obtaining their sponsorship in the hope of being subjected 
to less burdensome regulations and controls. The spread of sponsoring States 
“of convenience” would jeopardize uniform application of the highest standards of protection of the marine environment, the safe development of 
activities in the Area and protection of the common heritage of mankind.
160. These observations do not exclude that rules setting out direct obligations of the sponsoring State could provide for different treatment for developed and developing sponsoring States.
161. As pointed out in paragraph 125, the provisions of the Nodules 
Regulations and the Sulphides Regulations that set out the obligation for the 
sponsoring State to apply a precautionary approach in ensuring effective protection of the marine environment refer to Principle 15 of the Rio Declaration. 
As mentioned earlier, Principle 15 provides that the precautionary approach 
shall be applied by States “according to their capabilities”. It follows that the 
requirements for complying with the obligation to apply the precautionary 
approach may be stricter for the developed than for the developing sponsoring 
States. The reference to different capabilities in the Rio Declaration does not, 
however, apply to the obligation to follow “best environmental practices” set 
out, as mentioned above, in regulation 33, paragraph 2, of the Sulphides 
Regulations.
162. Furthermore, the reference to “capabilities” is only a broad and 
imprecise reference to the differences in developed and developing States. 
What counts in a specific situation is the level of scientific knowledge and 
technical capability available to a given State in the relevant scientific and 
technical fields.
163. It should be pointed out that the fifth preambular paragraph of the 
Convention emphasizes that the achievement of the goals of the Convention 
will “contribute to the realization of a just and equitable international economic order which takes into account the interests and needs of mankind as a 
whole and, in particular, the special interests and needs of developing countries, whether coastal or landlocked”. As noted above, article 148 of the 
Convention speaks about the promotion of the effective participation of developing States in activities in the Area. What is more important is that Annex III, 
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 55
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
article 9, paragraph 4, of the Convention specifically refers to the right of a 
developing State or any natural or juridical person sponsored by it and effectively controlled by it, to inform the Authority that it wishes to submit a plan 
of work with respect to a reserved area. These provisions have the effect of 
reserving half of the proposed contract areas in favour of the Authority and 
developing States. Together with those provisions mentioned in paragraph 
157, they require effective implementation with a view to enabling the developing States to participate in deep seabed mining on an equal footing with 
developed States. Developing States should receive necessary assistance 
including training.
Question 2
164. The second question submitted to the Chamber is as follows:
What is the extent of liability of a State Party for any failure to comply with 
the provisions of the Convention in particular Part XI, and the 1994 
Agreement, by an entity whom it has sponsored under Article 153, paragraph 2(b), of the Convention?
I. Applicable provisions
165. In replying to this question, the Chamber will proceed from article 
139, paragraph 2, of the Convention, read in conjunction with the second sentence of Annex III, article 4, paragraph 4, of the Convention.
166. Article 139, paragraph 2, of the Convention reads:
Without prejudice to the rules of international law and Annex III, article 
22, damage caused by the failure of a State Party or international organization to carry out its responsibilities under this Part shall entail liability; 
States Parties or international organizations acting together shall bear joint 
and several liability. A State Party shall not however be liable for damage 
caused by any failure to comply with this Part by a person whom it has 
sponsored under article 153, paragraph 2(b), if the State Party has taken all 
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 56
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
necessary and appropriate measures to secure effective compliance under 
article 153, paragraph 4, and Annex III, article 4, paragraph 4.
167. Annex III, article 4, paragraph 4, second sentence, of the Convention 
states:
A sponsoring State shall not, however, be liable for damage caused 
by any failure of a contractor sponsored by it to comply with its obligations 
if that State Party has adopted laws and regulations and taken 
administrative measures which are, within the framework of its legal 
system, reasonably appropriate for securing compliance by persons under 
its jurisdiction.
168. The Chamber will further take into account articles 235 and 304 as 
well as Annex III, article 22, of the Convention. Lastly, it will consider, as 
appropriate, the relevant rules on liability set out in the Nodules Regulations 
and the Sulphides Regulations. In this context, the Chamber notes that the 
Regulations issued to date by the Authority deal only with prospecting and 
exploration. Considering that the potential for damage, particularly to the 
marine environment, may increase during the exploitation phase, it is to be 
expected that member States of the Authority will further deal with the issue 
of liability in future regulations on exploitation. The Chamber would like to 
emphasize that it does not consider itself to be called upon to lay down such 
future rules on liability. The member States of the Authority may, however, 
take some guidance from the interpretation in this Advisory Opinion of the 
pertinent rules on the liability of sponsoring States in the Convention.
169. Since article 139, paragraph 2, and article 304 of the Convention 
refer, respectively, to the “rules of international law” and to “the application of 
existing rules and the development of further rules regarding responsibility and 
liability under international law”, account will have to be taken of such rules 
under customary law, especially in light of the ILC Articles on State 
Responsibility. Several of these articles are considered to reflect customary 
international law. Some of them, even in earlier versions, have been invoked 
as such by the Tribunal (The M/V “SAIGA” (No. 2) Case (Saint Vincent and 
the Grenadines v. Guinea), Judgment, ITLOS Reports 1999, p. 10, at paragraph 171) as well as by the ICJ (for example, Armed Activities on the Territory 
of the Congo (Democratic Republic of Congo v. Uganda), Judgment, I.C.J. 
Reports 2005, p. 168, at paragraph 160).
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 57
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
II. Liability in general
170. At the outset, the Chamber would like to state its understanding of 
the system of liability in regard to sponsoring States as set out in the Convention 
and related instruments.
171. Article 139, paragraph 2, of the Convention and the related provisions referred to above, prescribe or refer to different sources of liability, 
namely, rules concerning the liability of States Parties (article 139, paragraph 
2, first sentence, of the Convention), rules concerning sponsoring State liability 
(article 139, paragraph 2, second sentence, of the Convention), and rules concerning the liability of the contractor and the Authority (referred to in Annex 
III, article 22, of the Convention). The “without prejudice” clause in the first 
sentence of article 139, paragraph 2, of the Convention refers to the rules of 
international law concerning the liability of States Parties and international 
organizations. A reference to the international law rules on liability is also 
contained in article 304 of the Convention. The Chamber considers that these 
rules supplement the rules concerning the liability of the sponsoring State set 
out in the Convention.
172. From the wording of article 139, paragraph 2, of the Convention, it 
is evident that liability arises from the failure of the sponsoring State to carry 
out its own responsibilities. The sponsoring State is not, however, liable for the 
failure of the sponsored contractor to meet its obligations (see paragraph 
182).
173. There is, however, a link between the liability of the sponsoring State 
and the failure of the sponsored contractor to comply with its obligations, 
thereby causing damage. An examination of article 139 of the Convention and 
Annex III, article 4, paragraph 4, second sentence, of the Convention will 
establish more precisely the link between the damage caused by the contractor 
and the sponsoring State’s liability (see paragraph 181).
174. Whereas the first sentence of article 139, paragraph 2, of the 
Convention covers the failure of States Parties, including sponsoring States, to 
carry out their responsibilities in general, the second sentence deals only with 
the liability of sponsoring States.
III. Failure to carry out responsibilities
175. The Chamber will now turn to the interpretation of the elements 
constituting liability as set out in article 139, paragraph 2, of the Convention, 
read in conjunction with Annex III, article 4, paragraph 4, of the Convention.
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 58
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
176. The wording of article 139, paragraph 2, of the Convention clearly 
establishes two conditions for liability to arise: the failure of the sponsoring 
State to carry out its responsibilities (see paragraphs 64 to 71 on the meaning 
of key terms); and the occurrence of damage.
177. The failure of a sponsoring State to carry out its responsibilities, 
referred to in article 139, paragraph 2, of the Convention, may consist in an act 
or an omission that is contrary to that State’s responsibilities under the deep 
seabed mining regime. Whether a sponsoring State has carried out its responsibilities depends primarily on the requirements of the obligation which the 
sponsoring State is said to have breached. As stated above in the reply to 
Question 1 (see paragraph 121), sponsoring States have both direct obligations 
of their own and obligations in relation to the activities carried out by sponsored contractors. The nature of these obligations also determines the scope of 
liability. Whereas the liability of the sponsoring State for failure to meet its 
direct obligations is governed exclusively by the first sentence of article 139, 
paragraph 2, of the Convention, its liability for failure to meet its obligations 
in relation to damage caused by a sponsored contractor is covered by both the 
first and second sentences of the same paragraph.
IV. Damage
178. As stated above, according to the first sentence of article 139, paragraph 2, of the Convention, the failure of a sponsoring State to carry out its 
responsibilities entails liability only if there is damage. This provision covers 
neither the situation in which the sponsoring State has failed to carry out its 
responsibilities but there has been no damage, nor the situation in which there 
has been damage but the sponsoring State has met its obligations. This constitutes an exception to the customary international law rule on liability since, as 
stated in the Rainbow Warrior Arbitration (Case concerning the difference 
between New Zealand and France concerning the interpretation or application of two agreements, concluded on 9 July 1986 between the two States and 
which related to the problems arising from the Rainbow Warrior Affair, 
UNRIAA, 1990, vol. XX, p. 215, at paragraph 110), and in paragraph 9 of the 
Commentary to article 2 of the ILC Articles on State Responsibility, a State 
may be held liable under customary international law even if no material damage results from its failure to meet its international obligations.
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 59
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
179. Neither the Convention nor the relevant Regulations (regulation 30 
of the Nodules Regulations and regulation 32 of the Sulphides Regulations) 
specifies what constitutes compensable damage, or which subjects may be 
entitled to claim compensation. It may be envisaged that the damage in question would include damage to the Area and its resources constituting the common heritage of mankind, and damage to the marine environment. Subjects 
entitled to claim compensation may include the Authority, entities engaged in 
deep seabed mining, other users of the sea, and coastal States.
180. No provision of the Convention can be read as explicitly entitling the 
Authority to make such a claim. It may, however, be argued that such entitlement is implicit in article 137, paragraph 2, of the Convention, which states 
that the Authority shall act “on behalf” of mankind. Each State Party may also 
be entitled to claim compensation in light of the erga omnes character of the 
obligations relating to preservation of the environment of the high seas and in 
the Area. In support of this view, reference may be made to article 48 of the 
ILC Articles on State Responsibility, which provides:
Any State other than an injured State is entitled to invoke the responsibility 
of another State . . . if: (a) the obligation breached is owed to a group of 
States including that State, and is established for the protection of a collective interest of the group; or (b) the obligation breached is owed to the 
international community as a whole.
Causal link between failure and damage
181. Article 139, paragraph 2, first sentence, of the Convention refers to 
“damage caused”, which clearly indicates the necessity of a causal link 
between the damage and the failure of the sponsoring State to meet its responsibilities. The second sentence of article 139, paragraph 2, of the Convention 
does not mention this causal link. It refers only to a causal link between the 
activity of the sponsored contractor and the consequent damage. Nevertheless, 
the Chamber is of the view that, in order for the sponsoring State’s liability to 
arise, there must be a causal link between the failure of that State and the damage caused by the sponsored contractor.
182. Article 139, paragraph 2, of the Convention establishes that sponsoring States are responsible for ensuring that activities in the Area are carried out 
in conformity with Part XI of the Convention (see paragraph 108). This means 
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 60
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
that the sponsoring State’s liability arises not from a failure of a private entity 
but rather from its own failure to carry out its own responsibilities. In order for 
the sponsoring State’s liability to arise, it is necessary to establish that there is 
damage and that the damage was a result of the sponsoring State’s failure to 
carry out its responsibilities. Such a causal link cannot be presumed and must 
be proven. The rules on the liability of sponsoring States set out in article 139, 
paragraph 2, of the Convention and in the related instruments are in line with 
the rules of customary international law on this issue. Under international law, 
the acts of private entities are not directly attributable to States except where 
the entity in question is empowered to act as a State organ (article 5 of the ILC 
Articles on State Responsibility) or where its conduct is acknowledged and 
adopted by a State as its own (article 11 of the ILC Articles on State 
Responsibility). As explained in the present paragraph, the liability regime 
established in Annex III to the Convention and related instruments does not 
provide for the attribution of activities of sponsored contractors to sponsoring 
States.
183. In the event that no causal link pertaining to the failure of the sponsoring States to carry out their responsibilities and the damage caused can be 
established, the question arises whether they may nevertheless be held liable 
under the customary international law rules on State responsibility. This issue 
is dealt with in paragraphs 208 to 211.
184. For these reasons, the Chamber concludes that the liability of sponsoring States arises from their failure to carry out their own responsibilities and 
is triggered by the damage caused by sponsored contractors. There must be a 
causal link between the sponsoring State’s failure and the damage, and such a 
link cannot be presumed.
V. Exemption from liability
185. The Chamber will now direct its attention to the meaning of the 
clause “shall not however be liable for damage” in article 139, paragraph 2, 
second sentence, and in Annex III, article 4, paragraph 4, second sentence, of 
the Convention.
186. This clause provides for the exemption of the sponsoring State from 
liability. Its effect is that, in the event that the sponsored contractor fails to 
comply with the Convention, the Regulations or its contract, and such failure 
results in damage, the sponsoring State cannot be held liable. The condition for 
exemption of the sponsoring State from liability is that, as specified in article 
139, paragraph 2, of the Convention, it has taken “all necessary and appropriate 
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 61
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
measures to secure effective compliance” under article 153, paragraph 4, and 
Annex III, article 4, paragraph 4, of the Convention.
187. It may be pointed out that Annex III, article 4, paragraph 4, of the 
Convention does not give sponsoring States unlimited discretionary powers 
concerning the measures to be taken in order to avoid liability. This matter is 
dealt with in detail in the reply to Question 3.
VI. Scope of liability under the Convention
188. The Chamber will now deal with the scope of liability under article 
139, paragraph 2, second sentence, of the Convention. This requires addressing 
several issues, namely, the standard of liability, multiple sponsorship, the 
amount and form of compensation and the relationship between the liability of 
the contractor and of the sponsoring State.
Standard of liability
189. With regard to the standard of liability, it was argued in the proceedings that the sponsoring State has strict liability, i.e., liability without fault. The 
Chamber, however, would like to point out that liability for damage of the 
sponsoring State arises only from its failure to meet its obligation of due diligence. This rules out the application of strict liability.
Multiple sponsorship
190. According to Annex III, article 4, paragraph 3, of the Convention, in 
certain situations, applicants for contracts of exploration or exploitation may 
require the sponsorship of more than one State Party. This occurs when the 
applicant holds more than one nationality or where it holds the nationality of 
one State and is controlled by another State or by nationals of another State.
191. Neither article 139, paragraph 2, nor Annex III, article 4, paragraph 
4, of the Convention, indicates how sponsoring States are to share their liability. The Nodules Regulations and the Sulphides Regulations also do not provide guidance in this respect, with an exception as far as the certification of 
financial viability of the contractor is concerned. Such certification as required 
under regulation 12, paragraph 5(c), of the Nodules Regulations and under 
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 62
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
regulation 13, paragraph 4(c), of the Sulphides Regulations must be provided 
by the State that controls the applicant. Consequently, in this case, a failure of 
that State to comply with its obligations entails liability.
192. Apart from the exception mentioned in paragraph 191, the provisions 
of article 139, paragraph 2, of the Convention and related instruments dealing 
with sponsorship do not differentiate between single and multiple sponsorship. 
Accordingly, the Chamber takes the position that, in the event of multiple 
sponsorship, liability is joint and several unless otherwise provided in the 
Regulations issued by the Authority.
Amount and form of compensation
193. As regards the amount of compensation payable, it is pertinent to 
refer again to Annex III, article 22, of the Convention, which states, with 
respect to the Authority and the sponsored contractor, that “[l]iability in every 
case shall be for the actual amount of damage.” In this context, note should be 
taken of regulation 30 of the Nodules Regulations, the identical regulation 32 
of the Sulphides Regulations, and the identical section 16.1 of the Standard 
Clauses for exploration contracts (Annex 4 to the said Regulations).
194. The obligation for a State to provide for a full compensation or restituto in integrum is currently part of customary international law. This conclusion was first reached by the Permanent Court of International Justice in the 
Factory of Chorzów case (P.C.I.J. Series A, No. 17, p. 47). This obligation was 
further reiterated by the International Law Commission. According to article 
31, paragraph 1, of the ILC Articles on State Responsibility: “The responsible 
State is under an obligation to make full reparation for the injury caused by the 
internationally wrongful act”. The Chamber notes in this context that treaties 
on specific topics, such as nuclear energy or oil pollution, provide for limitations on liability together with strict liability.
195. In the light of the foregoing, it is the view of the Chamber that the 
provisions concerning liability of the contractor for the actual amount of damage, referred to in paragraph 193, are equally valid with regard to the liability 
of the sponsoring State.
196. As far as the form of the reparation is concerned, the Chamber 
wishes to refer to article 34 of the ILC Articles on State Responsibility. It 
reads:
Full reparation for the injury caused by the internationally wrongful act 
shall take the form of restitution, compensation and satisfaction, either 
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 63
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
singly or in combination, in accordance with the provisions of this 
chapter.
197. It is the view of the Chamber that the form of reparation will depend 
on both the actual damage and the technical feasibility of restoring the situation 
to the status quo ante.
198. It should be noted that, according to regulation 30 of the Nodules 
Regulations and regulation 32 of the Sulphides Regulations, the contractor 
remains liable for damage even after the completion of the exploration phase. 
In the view of the Chamber, this is equally valid for the liability of the sponsoring State.
Relationship between the liability of the contractor and of the sponsoring 
State
199. Concerning the relationship between the contractor’s liability and 
that of the sponsoring State, attention may be drawn to Annex III, article 22, 
of the Convention. This provision reads as follows:
The contractor shall have responsibility or liability for any damage arising 
out of wrongful acts in the conduct of its operations, account being taken 
of contributory acts or omissions by the Authority. Similarly, the Authority 
shall have responsibility or liability for any damage arising out of wrongful acts in the exercise of its powers and functions, including violations 
under article 168, paragraph 2, account being taken of contributory acts or 
omissions by the contractor. Liability in every case shall be for the actual 
amount of damage. (Emphasis added)
200. No reference is made in this provision to the liability of sponsoring 
States. It may therefore be deduced that the main liability for a wrongful act 
committed in the conduct of the contractor’s operations or in the exercise of 
the Authority’s powers and functions rests with the contractor and the 
Authority, respectively, rather than with the sponsoring State. In the view of 
the Chamber, this reflects the distribution of responsibilities for deep seabed 
mining activities between the contractor, the Authority and the sponsoring 
State.
201. In this context, the question of whether the contractor and the sponsoring State bear joint and several liability was raised in the proceedings. 
Nothing in the Convention and related instruments indicates that this is the 
case. Joint and several liability arises where different entities have contributed 
responsibilities and obligations of states with respect to 64
activities in the area (advisory opinion of 1 february 2011)
to the same damage so that full reparation can be claimed from all or any of 
them. This is not the case under the liability regime established in article 139, 
paragraph 2, of the Convention. As noted above, the liability of the sponsoring 
State arises from its own failure to carry out its responsibilities, whereas the 
contractor’s liability arises from its own non-compliance. Both forms of liability exist in parallel. There is only one point of connection, namely, that the 
liability of the sponsoring State depends upon the damage resulting from 
activities or omissions of the sponsored contractor (see paragraph 181). But, 
in the view of the Chamber, this is merely a trigger mechanism. Such damage 
is not, however, automatically attributable to the sponsoring State.
202. If the contractor has paid the actual amount of damage, as required 
under Annex III, article 22, of the Convention, in the view of the Chamber, 
there is no room for reparation by the sponsoring State.
203. The situation becomes more complex if the contractor has not covered the damage fully. It was pointed out in the proceedings that a gap in liability may occur if, notwithstanding the fact that the sponsoring State has taken 
all necessary and appropriate measures, the sponsored contractor has caused 
damage and is unable to meet its liability in full. It was further pointed out that 
a gap in liability may also occur if the sponsoring State failed to meet its obligations but that failure is not causally linked to the damage. In their written and 
oral statements, States Parties have expressed different views on this issue. 
Some have argued that the sponsoring State has a residual liability, that is, the 
liability to cover the damage not covered by the sponsored contractor although 
the conditions for a liability of the sponsoring State under article 139, paragraph 2, of the Convention are not met. Other States Parties have taken the 
opposite position.
204. In the view of the Chamber, the liability regime established by article 
139 of the Convention and in related instruments leaves no room for residual 
liability. As outlined in paragraph 201, the liability of the sponsoring State and 
the liability of the sponsored contractor exist in parallel. The liability of the 
sponsoring State arises from its own failure to comply with its responsibilities 
under the Convention and related instruments. The liability of the sponsored 
contractor arises from its failure to comply with its obligations under its contract and its undertakings thereunder. As has been established, the liability of 
the spons